I have to tell you, somehow I never thought of this before.
It occurred that you have to do this.
But by August of 1980,
It was really like zero budget.
And I don't even know what it was going on.
For the course of doing it, I've had a chance to meet the older generation.
I've had a very extraordinary experience.
Dear friends and I, I want you to know what my wife and I want you to know.
I want you to know that my wife and I have had many difficulties in our decisions.
Securing a home for our Yorishians, their inheritance, and their inheritance, of course, is of people who had no money, who had no means, but they were leaving the world with their books.
And their own children weren't interested, and they wanted to come to us.
And the whole letter is written in English?
Yeah.
That's nice.
I like that.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's about these encounters.
Are you going to be able to give me a couple of these at some point?
Some of these stories?
Yeah.
Sure, sure.
I don't mean your writing.
I mean, you know, you relate something.
Yeah, I mean, there's really thousands of them.
We've been on the road for five years almost all the time.
Thousands of people in every place you went to.
Are these basically people responding to your
Yeah, people read about it.
People who had books didn't know what to do about it.
Things have changed a lot now.
This was five years since I was on the road regularly myself.
When I was on the road regularly, I was picking up probably 90% of our stops were from older Jews giving up to new libraries.
Now it's just the opposite.
I dealt with 10% of the books we pick up now come from older Jews.
close-income children, grandchildren in the suburbs who have the parents and grandparents.
So we really were right there in the crossroads between two generations, sort of that cusp of the world.
Cusp.
Yeah, the older generation was passing on, the newer generation was taking over.
We were right there exactly at that just for a moment.
If you had to pick any decade in the 20th century to do this, we were exactly at the right point.
Did you find that it was kind of like you quoted that letter?
You called that one.
That you were taking something that was part of the person, part of the life.
Did you ever have this feeling that you were receiving, accepting a tremendous gift that's almost a flesh and blood?
Am I reaching too far on that?
No, no, no.
It was never a matter of just giving us promises.
It was always an error.
Giving us individual books.
Almost always people would go through the book.
Were there any tears at all?
Almost always, yeah.
This book in 1947, my wife and I, I remember the day we bought this book.
We went without lunch for a week.
We used to pull it.
See, this is another thing I had in my book.
Just about every important collector is a book person.
You're a collector.
Right, right, right.
You are.
You're in there as such.
And I sort of anoint you as a collector.
The true collector has a story for every book.
You can't take a book off the shelf and just say, this is a book.
It's a story.
It goes with it.
And everyone transports you.
I mean, takes you to some point.
Every book on a story.
I thought it was very emotional.
And books carry their baggage through time, I think.
Of course.
I'll tell you two stories.
I'll give you some sense of personal emotion in it.
One was a woman in Montreal.
Towards the very beginning, we picked up what's going on.
We got to her house, and she was a woman who did not speak with an accent.
She actually had a British accent.
Very, very articulate, very beautiful English.
She had been born in London.
She was Jewish, but had been born in London quite early.
And she had married an East European Jewish refugee, and her husband was a Yiddish speaker.
And she said, you know, she had a lot of books, maybe three or four big boxes of books for us.
And she said, I want you to know that all my life I always looked down on my husband intellectually because he couldn't speak English.
And I knew that he always read these Yiddish books, and I never understood what they were, and I always thought they were nothing, and I'm afraid I always denigrated him.
And I look back on this now, and I feel very bad about what I did, but I never had
I couldn't read these books, and I had no respect for this culture.
I thought that English culture was a high point.
So she never paid much attention to it.
After her husband died, which was just recently, I started getting to wondering what these books might be, and I decided I really owe it to my husband's memory to do something about this psychology well.
She says, can you tell me what the books are?
So we started going through the boxes.
It turned out she had in those boxes some of the rarest books to this day that we've ever found.
There were bound volumes of publications printed by the Bund, the Jewish Labor Movement, the Jewish Socialist Movement in Russia, printed at the time of the 1905 revolution and a little before as well.
So they were printed on the Bund's press abroad, mostly in London and Geneva, and then printed on tissue paper so they could be easily smuggled back into Russia, which was of course illegal.
Almost all this stuff was destroyed.
This printout tissue paper was smuggled into the country.
Very little survived.
She had books that existed nowhere else in the world.
And what, somehow her husband had that human stuff.
And they had the mark, they were all bound together.
So it was five or six feet little pamphlets in a bound volume, a bound hardcover volume.
And the books had the mark of a bookbinder in Montreal.
And it was just a moonbinder on St.
Lawrence Street in Montreal.
And this guy had the bookbinder.
a real scholar, a true historian, a true collection of saving his material.
Mrs. Fletcher?
Yeah.
We don't remember the first name.
We got to find it.
Maybe.
Yeah.
You're telling me that these are irreplaceable books?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
I've probably been finding them.
I think I know where.
Where are they?
Well, most of them ended up at a few places, Library of Congress, and a place called YIVO Institute in New York, which is the Central Yiddish Research Archive of the World, which exists in New York City, and a story in its own life.
So she passed on that collection to us.
And as I started taking them out, we explained what each book was and such and such.
I thought I'd explain to her what this material was and how rare it was.
And I remember her starting to climb.
She was a very dignified woman.
I remember the tears started to roll down her cheek.
And she did know who her husband was.
She was all these years.
I never understood who one husband was.
What did he do?
What was his profession?
I think there's probably a work on her own there.
That's wonderful.
Yeah.
In the Jewish world, of course, you know, many Jews who were intellectuals who were just workers.
But it was just a very intellectual culture.
There was no connection.
Do you remember the title of the books?
Yeah, they were all published by the Burns Press.
There would have been a revolutionary campus of various... Would you say of great interest to scholars at some point?
Oh, enormous interest to scholars.
No, enormous interest to scholars.
These were lost words.
Now, did you know this when you saw that?
Yeah, I know Yiddish.
So you'd become something of a Yiddish bibliographer then?
Would you say that you have bibliographical skills?
Sure.
I know a lot about Jewish books that I've been working on.
You can look at the title and say, this is a book.
Oh, of course.
You don't buy books.
That's important.
No, we have an absolute policy.
Tell me about that.
We only accept contributions.
We've never bought a book in all this time.
We've collected over 900,000 pounds.
And that's not your mission.
Your mission is not to buy books and sell them.
We're a non-profit organization.
Our work is to collect the books and then get them back into circulation.
To rescue and retrieve, I guess, or retrieve and rescue.
Yeah, to rescue Yiddish books and return them back.
Take old books and put them in the hands of new readers.
Now you have 900,000 books at your home.
I'm going to just tell you one other story first, the same kind of story.
I love that story.
Yeah, another one, exactly the same kind of thing.
A woman in New York, her husband had been a man named Philip Sandwick, who was the editor of one of the Yiddish newspapers in New York City, a news editor, a managing editor of one of the papers.
And this is also quite a while ago now.
We went into her apartment.
She's not lying.
Her husband had died.
And it was quite late at night.
We probably got there by 11 o'clock.
We usually try to do a lot of pickups in the day.
We'd get very far behind schedule.
I remember her sitting at the kitchen table.
Two of us were hauling out the books while two of us sat with her holding her hand.
And again, she was just crying and crying.
She was almost like they're taking out the body all over her hands without lying.
And of course, they'd be taking out these books and all the time.
It's hard, physical.
I mean, it's hard, physical.
I mean, it's hard.
The logistics of it is tough enough to begin with.
It was a very emotional encounter.
This happened over and over and over again, I remember.
I love this story.
I don't know where I read it.
Was it the Atlantic City?
Oh, yeah.
That was the great first pickup I ever did there.
He said, young man, you haven't even gone upstairs.
Yeah, he took me through the whole building.
Every single person in the building had stuff.
And everyone had stuff.
So you were late for the Philly appointment, but it was worth it.
How large is the truck?
Is that a ton, by the way?
Yeah, we can put about two and a half tons on it.
I'm not sure what the rating is.
I know it sounds crazy, all these little points, but I mean, we have another truck out there, two and a half tons, and the mission of that truck is to go out and pick up books.
It's like a book ambulance is what it is.
Yeah, exactly.
That truck we got much later enough where I wish we had had that in the early days.
You say that's a policy.
You will not buy books.
And you arrived at that from the beginning.
Yeah, people get tax write-offs for giving us books.
Well, what if somebody had something that was a season of... They wanted to sell?
Yeah.
What would you do?
If they think they can make money on selling a book, you know, it's trying to create a market and they're guessing that you use it.
And if somebody buys it, they're probably going to protect it.
Yeah, exactly.
But it hasn't happened.
No, but that's... Because a lot of what I'm writing about is the marketplace, too.
Yeah, but we try...
We've done two things, actually, with the marketplace.
When we started out, English books were a very peculiar commodity.
You'd either find them at enormously high prices, you know, a real catalog or some European book dealer, you know, some very, very rare thing, or else you'd find them in a garbage can, you'd find them in a Goodwill store or in a Hadassah store, you know, for a buck and a 50 cent.
When we started out, we'd distribute books as well.
We'd charge, you know, a reasonable price for distributing books.
$7, $10, $15, depending on the book that we're sending to libraries.
We were very insistent about that, right, from the beginning, about that as well.
First of all, it brings in part of our income, 20% version.
But for a more important reason, we thought Yiddish has to be regarded like all other literatures.
The first editions in Yiddish were selling for 50 cents, but the first edition of a great writer in other language might be selling for $50,000.
It just was wrong.
In Yiddish in the world, literature needs to be regarded as such.
for years and years as to how Yiddish is inferior, or that Yiddish was a vernacular, or it wasn't really a language.
A vernacular, oh, that's what you got as inferior.
Yeah, this isn't a bastard language.
But you cannot dismiss the great writers who had written that.
Well, they were dismissed for a long time, though.
You know, it's only recently that we didn't get their due or that Yiddish books become recognized.
So a lot of our work now is trying to get the books back in circulation.
That's really what our primary effort is.
We'll see down in Holyoke when they were in an enormous operation there, where the books are now finally all sorted.
And now we're putting them onto a computer system, a Vax computer, and sweat everything out on there.
And then we send lists off regularly to libraries all over the world.
So we're the only supplier of Yiddish books in the world today.
There is no other, or at least no other comprehensive supplier.
And we used to have about 70 libraries, something called the Library Development Program, the Yiddish Library Development Program.
That's the name of Yiddish?
Yes.
Library Development Program.
I'll give you a brochure.
And there are about 70 libraries around the world participating in this.
where we even give them complete collections of British literature, completely cataloging.
Or they simply acquire individual books, they go through our printouts, and they fill the holes in their own collections.
Are you making editorial decisions?
And not decisions, but judgments.
It's more important than that.
Oh, of course.
And you do have people down there who are trained to do it, who are trained to do this.
It's the nature of the world.
And then maybe I'll talk to them.
There's a woman who has a note, a short article.
You got it from Israel, I guess.
Yeah, Maccabee.
She sounds like she'd be left left out.
Yeah, you step and spend time speaking with her.
She's really the hero of all this, and that she took the operation on Holiok.
Three years ago, when she started, Holiok was just a disaster area.
I mean, it was just literally mountains and mountains and mountains of books.
Just all piled loose, you know, hundreds of thousands.
So phase one, basically, was to go and get it.
Exactly.
Get it and save it.
Then phase whatever, all right, now we can catalog it and put it away and maybe find your own story.
Yeah, phase two was getting the books into certain processing them in order to get them into certain things.
But I see these photographs.
Yes.
It doesn't look that way anymore.
All the books.
They have the before and after.
Yeah, yeah.
The books are on shelves now.
What's this thing with Yale, 10,000 books like that?
That's one of the biggest things we've done so far.
Our real goal is to get Yiddish books into the world's great libraries.
Up until recently, most of the world's great libraries never had Yiddish collection.
Harvard is an exception.
But most of the great libraries never had Yiddish books.
When the books were in print, it was seen as, you know, workers' literature or vernacular or, you know, it wasn't regarded as world literature.
No one recognized its value anymore.
So the books were largely ignored.
Now, when suddenly the value of Yiddish literature has become apparent, and now we understand that.
They're both crucial historical sources for understanding the European Jewish experience.
And it's a great literature in its own right.
I mean, the Shabbat Singer won the Nobel Prize in 78, Elie Wiesel who also won the Nobel Peace Prize with his first book written in Yiddish.
So suddenly libraries understand or scholars understand the value of this literature.
It was our goal to get those books into place.
At Yale, we set up a collection of 10,000 volumes.
It was a very big thing called a Joseph and Rosalind Newman, N-E-W-M-A-N, collection.
And again, I'll give you names of people to speak with about this, because that was a really significant thing.
And going down to Yale, I'm just going to step up and find it.
Oh, you should definitely speak with people.
I'll give you two names down there.
The collection at Yale was a major turning point for us.
And this was when?
This was last year, I think.
Yeah, because it was the first time that a major library, and we are, I think, the seventh largest library,
And it's the first time that a library of that statue recognized the importance of Yiddish in what they call retrospectively.
You know, it went back and picked up out-of-print Yiddish books, a collection of 10,000 volumes.
It's highly significant.
Yeah, the Yale thing is really highly significant in many ways.
It's really the vindication of much of what it is.
It really is.
And since Yale did that, many other libraries all over the world have fallen asleep.
It kind of just made it clear that
Any library wanting to have serious Jewish holdings simply has to come to terms with the initial agent, and that's now become apparent.
Let's clarify that point, and it's an absolute discernment.
So were the people there?
There were two people.
The bibliographer, the one who's .
L-E-R-M-A-N.
Yeah.
She's a good person to speak with in every way.
Yeah, plus Yale's whole set up there is just beautiful.
It's love there.
It really is.
It's one of those great libraries where it gives you a sense of all of them.
Oh, see, I'll be writing about Texas and BU only because they've built interesting collections in the last 30 years.
But again, don't think for one second and how many of them are in Harvard Yale.
Right.
Yeah.
And we're still quite a bit at Harvard now also.
Not to be those ones who tell you about all these drafts.
I don't have a bibliography.
Okay, well, she's in Yale, right?
Yeah, she's the Judaica bibliography, Yale.
Actually, the other person there is the head of collection development.
My name is Michael Keller, K-E-L-L-E-R.
His number is 203-432-1764.
1764.
Head of what was his title?
Collections Development, the assistant director.
All collections?
Yeah, all collections.
The other person is a key player, and there's a people who gave the money to get on the scrolls, but they might be willing to tell you, but the people who put up this very substantial fund, not only for the acquisition of the books, but in order to have them cataloged as well.
There was a terrific couple who had a lot of foresight, basically, named Joe and Roz Newman.
Joe and Roz Newman.
Yeah, Roz Newman.
R-O-S-A-L-Y-N, I guess.
Joe and Roz Newman.
They're in Florida right now.
Joe's number is 407-588-7032.
That's the Florida number?
Yes.
7032?
And where are they from?
From Scarsdale.
You got the Scarsdale number?
Yeah, number in Scarsdale, 914-723-0898.
They enable this.
Exactly.
And they really had the visions on the stand.
I saw their names sometimes.
Probably in our newsletter where they describe what they had done here.
Well, that's possible.
It's been a bit of press.
Oh, I just read it last night.
Thanks.
All right.
Yeah.
Okay.
Let's go.
Continue.
I've got a half an hour for you tonight.
Okay.
Some of the collective stories we can do next time.
We'll be fresher again.
The last piece of it, though, is just
that we've moved beyond just collecting and distributing books.
That's really been the core of our work in the first 10 years.
Now we're reaching into the third phase of our work, which, as we say, is to open up the books and let the world know what's inside of them.
I mean, when you walk into Holy, if you understand what I'm saying, but you walk in there, then you look at this vast, expanse of books in this very large place, and a great many books in the shelves, and you realize that what is here are not just old books, but it's an entire civilization.
It's a whole world, it's a whole universe.
Do that hit you any on that?
Sometimes I go there, not always.
You know, you're busy and it's hard and you're driving trucks and things, you know, heavy duty, industrial process to handle all this.
But sometimes if I come in there late at night, you know, I need to take care of something and I walk in there and I see the light coming in and I see those books there, I suddenly understand what this means.
This is a civilization, it's the whole world here that was almost destroyed.
And this is what remains.
I see that often, you know,
And oftentimes we'll have people come up there, particularly when they're Holocaust survivors or people who came from Eastern America.
And I've noticed this for years now.
They come up on the elevator and walk up the stairs there.
And they walk into that room and they just stop in their tracks.
And more often than not, they just burst out into tears.
I mean, these are people who are emotional people.
Yeah, and they just shift their time.
And I mean, time at the time, they'll say to them,
people who survived the death camps, who lost their families, who lost everything.
I thought this world was destroyed.
I didn't know to see that this has survived.
You're doing things other than books, I noticed.
Music.
Yeah, we take not just books, but any written books.
And I guess you're doing some of these on tape.
You're making them available.
Yeah, that's another program we have.
That's interesting.
Yeah, and we're really trying to make the literature accessible in a way.
To understand what's there, and it's a whole world that almost was destroyed.
that almost no one knows of anymore.
In fact, these books are sitting in an old factory in Holyoke, Massachusetts.
Somehow this has to come out of the broader world.
Yeah, there are, what, 900,000 books there, or you have retrieved 900,000 books?
Yeah, there were probably almost 700,000 or 800,000 books there.
And how many of you placed, would you say?
I'm not sure.
Maccabee could tell you that there's a nine-month.
Give me an idea, but I will understand.
So in other words, nine-tenths, 90% of what you've acquired
You only want to until you're short.
It's like you just don't send your child out.
What we're doing is developing the demand for the books.
Remember, when we started, there was no demand.
No one wanted these books.
We are educating the world as to why these books are important to get people to read them once again.
So our primary goal is the university libraries right now.
Eventually, we'll do reprint editions as well.
Of course, we don't have enough duplicate copies of what we can reprint them.
Do you insist on keeping one copy of everything?
No, we make sure that one copy goes into one of several major libraries so we have access to it.
And we maintain a permanent loan collection at the YIVO, at the major Yiddish research institute in New York, at the Library of Congress, Harvard, and Vienna.
So between those four libraries, one copy.
Who do you deal with at Harvard?
Roger Stott?
No, there's Charles Berlin.
But again, you should speak to Maccabees first, and she can tell you all about it.
I'm going to set up some standards, too.
Tell me about the Soviet Union, though, for some time.
Okay.
Soviet Union's kind of a side story, as well.
Let me just finish what we're doing now.
Our work now is much more geared with an educational program, to let the world know it's inside the literature.
Back in 83, we started a week-long summer program in Yiddish culture for adults.
First year we offered it, we had 45 places, and got 2,000 applications.
we realize how much thirst there is for substantive Jewish learning in this country right now.
And we're hoping to respond to that.
Eventually we want to develop a year-round conference center where we'll have visiting faculty and have adult education programs year-round to teach teachers, to teach community leaders about the world.
We're at an historical moment where it's 45, 50 years after the Holocaust.
We're ready to pick up a piece of a world that was almost destroyed.
We have the books in place now.
That was the precondition.
Without the books, there was no access to the world of East Jersey and Jewish culture.
Now that we have the books, we let people know what they're all about.
We'll be doing much more educational work for years and years going on.
How about individuals?
Do you replace books with individuals?
Students, scholars, we have enough copies of the books.
Books we have, four or five, ten copies, and we know there's not a huge demand in the library, then we'll make them available individually.
Right now, really, it's repositories.
It's largely libraries right now.
That's the future.
Books will be available forever.
Yeah.
But we do have a program.
We have something called the Gilpin, G-I-L-P-I-N, Yiddish Student Book Fund, in which we provide subsidies to college students who want to buy Yiddish books.
They join this fund.
And they can get books in which we have a lot of copies of the books they're using in their own studies.
They can get, usually, from, I think, about 10% of the college students.
They're a cost of a dollar a book or something, or 50% of it.
I guess at some point we have to talk about the MacArthur grant, the genius grant.
How do you feel uncomfortable when you describe it when you receive the genius grant?
I don't think it was one way or the other.
I mean, the grant was a great thing.
Bill, William Kennedy, who I'd like to use MacArthur grant.
It's made me, it's allowed me to write a little bit now.
But I have to believe you're the only book collector, in a very generic sense, who's been so designated.
The issue I'm struggling with is that the books are the way in which to preserve the culture, not just the books themselves.
What's inside the book?
Most book collectors are interested in that.
Many book collectors are interested in that.
There's a book of first editions, the rare editions.
The scarcity.
Yeah, those aren't much more interested in the inscribable value of the literature at this point.
Whatever a book is a first edition is quite irrelevant to you.
Most of the Yiddish literature is rare, right?
But yes, that's not the point.
What is this literature?
What does it have to say to us?
Does it have to state the world for them?
is the people who lived on the outside of European civilization for a thousand years developed a very different moral view of the world, a very different point of view and political.
And I think it's a great deal to stay for that.
The people who didn't march off to war, the people who weren't part of that whole militarist traditional line of the core of our culture.
What does that mean?
What does that culture get to help the state of the world, especially now with nuclear weapons with a very different way?
We're all in the same boat, in effect.
When we talk about preserving, saving, retrieving, what would you say is the scarcest, most extraordinary plan?
I noticed in this most recent book cover you've seen.
That's probably the one.
That's quite it.
I read it.
I thought the magazine, by the way, was quite excellent.
Thank you.
I read it coming to the cover last year.
Yeah, there were other things like that, but that one was not .
And then you also made an appeal to find out the provenance.
That's where it came from, yeah.
We found out more .
Yeah, as soon as the book was broadcast, probably right after that, as far as we know, it was there when the book was published.
It took it just before all the other copies were confiscated, and you never realized .
The night I found that book, one of our interns found it in a box.
We teach them what to look for.
An intern found it?
Yeah.
Tell me a little bit about that.
One of the interests, you know, that we teach them rare books and Soviet imprints from that period are very rare.
We teach them what to look for generally.
They bring rare books and compile them up.
Do they get excited too?
Oh, yeah.
There's no way to know what's valuable, what's not.
You don't have to pile these books up, and I don't look through them, I don't have to be able to do them.
This particular book hasn't been found before in a pile, and I finally got around to going through it.
And I was sitting here at my desk and I was looking through these books.
About 8 o'clock at night, I was working pretty late that night.
And I looked at that book and I had never seen it before.
And it was very unlikely that a book that was found in court, the lexicon of foreign terminology was very critical because it shows how Jews are perceiving the outside world at that time.
It was a critical book from the scholarly point of view.
So I knew that I really needed to understand what the, you know,
I couldn't understand why I've never heard of it before.
And there are no references for you to go to.
That's another problem that you have.
Well, we have the Library of Congress card catalogs here.
We have Evo's card catalogs.
I looked at both of those and the book book was there.
But suddenly I know it's buried alive.
And I guess it's probably an only copy of it.
It has your attention at this point.
Yeah, definitely there's a good chance to be on the copy.
Excellent.
Either of those copies.
Either of those catalogs.
But I couldn't find mention of it.
I couldn't find anything.
I was getting a later thing.
Nine o'clock now, it's dark.
I'll tell you the Sunday night.
Finally, in one of the biographical dictionaries of the author in Yiddish, it says how this guy worked throughout the later part of the 1920s, preparing this lexicon of political and moral terminologies in Yiddish.
This was his magnum opus.
The book was published in 1929, but all copies were confiscated by the KGB upon publication, and all copies were destroyed.
No copies survived.
I'm reading this.
I'm holding this thing on my hand.
I didn't know what to do.
First, I ran.
I turned on the bird girl.
I didn't know what to do.
The next morning, I called out.
You went and turned on a bird girl.
I said, you really want to treasure this.
And the condition, apparently, is excellent.
Very good.
Then did anyone else corroborate this, or was this pretty much your research?
No, then the guy who wrote that article, Zachary Baker, is probably the greatest.
Was he excited when you thought he was thrilled?
What did he say?
Oh, he couldn't believe it.
He quickly ran and researched it.
He found there wasn't one microfilm copy of somewhere
Somehow, if someone's had this one microphone copy, at least they thought they'd give yours.
So now yours, your copy went to New York, right?
Yeah, it's the copy right now.
It is the deep copy?
Wow.
Yeah, there may be a copy in Israel, but I'm not sure.
Exactly.
Are you placing any books in Israel, by the way?
A lot, certainly.
Yeah, all the major numbers.
That's great.
Yeah.
Are there any other cultural groups that you think could do the same kind of thing as you're doing?
Or is the English pretty much a unique...
Of reclaiming a whole literature like that?
Yeah.
Well, I think there's always work to be done, but I think it isn't unique.
It is.
I mean, there isn't anything like an American Indian zone.
No, it was a unique historical phenomenon in the sense that it was a recent literature, a very compressed literary development.
So reclaimable, if you work with it.
Yeah, it was a very compressed literary development.
All these titles, 40,000 titles in a period of 60 or 70 years, were published in large numbers.
and then quickly the literature's cut off the population and potentially destroyed and then the books remain as the record of that culture.
I'm not sure it's... You don't know whether this furnishes an example, say, for some... Oh, I would like to think it does, but I'm not sure any other cultures are going to yield a million books.
I'm not sure any other cultures... Are millions, I wonder?
Well, I don't think any other cultures have that kind of disruption.
Again, the fact that Yiddish never had a country in that sense, Yiddish is
I was just going to say almost unique because I was thinking of Romani as the other.
I don't know if there's one of the universe.
I don't know the answer to that.
But Yiddish is certainly unique as a strong literary tradition for a language without a country.
Another characteristic point is almost the same thing with the Esperanto, which works on these books in Toronto.
But that was almost a Jewish invention.
They said that the Esperanto conventions and war started in the 1930s.
You want to do the collecting stories like the next time?
Yeah, we'll do that in another question.
Because I think we've hit a lot of excellent things.
Good.
And this will give me a chance really to assess what we've done.
That's fine.
Okay.
More detailed questions.
In the meantime,
I'll tell you people are holy open.
Yeah, my work's out of here.
You should do it through here.
You might mention that you should talk to me.
Yeah.
Justice, is my computer here today?
No, it's your Monday when it's your birthday.
I haven't seen it at all.
Okay, yeah.
I just came back from there.
I spent almost a month there.
We started getting a lot of requests from Jews and Soviet Union, asking us to go up, staying there, starting schools, starting cultural centers, and looking for the books to read.
So we would respond to this.
We would send them free to charge any books they needed.
I thought it had been cut off for 72 years.
It was illegal to own these books and suddenly had a chance.
We would do what we could.
We went there at the very end of November, spent close to a month traveling around, meeting these people in person.
And what we found was a very disturbing situation, in a way.
It wasn't what we expected.
We kind of had this notion that here was a community poised and ready for some kind of cultural renaissance and that we could bring large numbers of books in.
This would be a million and a half Jews suddenly coming to life together.
Well, that wasn't the case.
There were two factors.
And one is that assimilation is extreme.
After 72 years, several generations are being cut off.
There's very little knowledge left in the community to build upon.
And the other is that anti-Semitism is so extreme that many Jews are getting out of it.
Most Jews were there trying to leave at this point.
So I guess I don't see a huge future there.
On the other hand, particularly in the Baltics, there is some very interesting activity.
In the Baltics that started Jewish schools, teachers who were trained in Yiddish and Hebrew teachers' academies before the war have organized new schools.
They're not Jewish schools.
They're beginning to teach and study, you know, teach young kids.
You're going to have 400 kids that don't even read us, that mean Yiddish.
So in those places, they're desperate for books.
The way in which books are rare there, I mean, it appears to your eyes when the school in Riga just opened its doors in September, they have one Jewish music book, one Yiddish music book,
which they keep wrapped up in special taping.
The music teacher carries her with her wherever she goes, the only book in the school.
And they had no Yiddish textbooks to use to teach kids.
And so one of the teachers put together a book on her own.
She had no Yiddish type, a Hebrew type.
So she hand-wrote part of the book.
And the rest of it, she took all the books that she had and cut them up and pasted them together in like an extortion note and reconstructed a new book.
and they printed it on the press of the Central Committee of the Communist Party in Latvia, and that's the textbook period.
So you are making... We're going to bring them books.
It's not a token.
No, no, it's a real thing.
It's not a token thing.
It's a very real thing.
Are you bringing them, or are you donating them?
It's a very real thing, which will make a very real difference to a limited number of people, but it won't change the face of the Jewish community of the Soviet Union.
How many books do you think you've got to play so far?
I think about 8,000 or 9,000.
And we'll bring them ourselves.
You know, to ship them is not reliable.
They don't get delivered.
And so we're actually going to bring the books in.
We'll ship the books as far as Stockholm, load them onto a truck in Stockholm, ship the truck on a boat, bring the truck as far as it is, Palo and Origa, coming to the country that way, and then driving around the street with things.
How do you, Maccabib, is that how you pronounce her name?
The woman I hope you're talking about?
Oh, Maccabib.
M-A-C-C-A-B-I-B.
Maccabib. Right.
I'm going to switch sides now. Okay.
Part of the reason we've been successful here is because our focus has been books.
To speak about Yiddish culture, the abstract, to speak about books in particular.
I think many people share that love of books, that love of the written word, which is why this book, your book, will work so well, I think.
I hope so.
You know, I just go back to when Holden Reckman told me that they didn't think it would appeal to a limited number of people.
They don't know.
I mean, they don't know.
We're not talking about a Sunday football game, but there are a lot of people who love books, I mean, who love books.
They love, and collecting has never been more popular than it is now, trying to do this without crushing it.
I have a pretty large library at home, but I've been much less concerned about collecting books because having a million books sitting in a warehouse, one would be a little less enthusiastic about adding to the books.
Now I only buy books that I read at this point.
I was going to say, how about yourself?
What do you read?
I read a great deal.
I tend to read literature.
I almost never read modern novels.
From various literary... Oh, sure.
I mean, I still read Yiddish literature, of course, but I also read a great deal of English and French and a lot of other literatures as well.
Everybody from Zola to...anyway, I mean, all great literature I love, and I can read endlessly.
If I had nothing else to do, I would read for the next three years.
You do go up to Nova Scotia, I understand, a couple of weeks just to... Yeah, summer hustle.
And it just allows you to... Right.
But I imagine this is never far from your mind, though.
Oh, the work?
Yeah.
Checking into the office every two days.
It's a busy place.
Okay.
Good.
I'll be back.